Page |8


1    Introduction

Water pollution presents a critical environmental and public health challenge worldwide,
with particularly severe repercussions in developing nations (Lin et al., 2022; Madhav et
al., 2020). In the Philippines, over 90% of wastewater is discharged untreated into natural
water bodies annually (Tabios III, 2020). This leads to the degradation of aquatic
ecosystems, which pose risks to human health (NEDA & DOH, 2010; Tabios III, 2020).
Addressing this issue requires innovative and contextually appropriate wastewater
treatment technologies. Biological wastewater treatment is the most widely used
consortium of technologies worldwide to combat this issue (Duan et al., 2022; Hellal &
Abou-Elela, 2021; Liang et al., 2021; Rapi et al., 2021; Winkler & Straka, 2019) and is the
dominant approach applied for wastewater treatment in developing countries (Damalerio,
Beltran, Orbecido, et al., 2022; Machdar et al., 1997; Ulrich et al., 2009). There are two
objectives in biologically treating domestic wastewater. The first objective is to
substantially reduce its organic matter content, which inhibits the growth of heterotrophic
organisms (Marais & Ekama, 1976). This process prevents the potential spread of
disease and mitigates the depletion of O 2 in water bodies, which is a common
consequence of excessive heterotrophic activity. The secondary goal is to curtail the
concentration of eutrophic substances, such as NH4+, NO2⁻, and NO3⁻ (Marais & Ekama,
1976). This curtailment restricts the growth of autotrophic organisms and safeguards the
receiving water bodies from harmful algal blooms.

                                                                             Good-enough
    Observations           Physical Models          Trial and Error
                                                                               Designs



                                                                            Globally Optimal
                                                   Exact Algorithms
                                                                                Designs



                                                                            Locally Optimal
                                                  Heuristic Algorithms
                                                                               Designs




                                                        Linear
                                                   Approximation of
                                                                             Near-globally
                                                    Physical Models
                                                                            Optimal Designs
                                                           +
                                                   Exact Algorithms



Figure 1-1 General wastewater treatment design flow with alternative computational
methodologies and design outputs

Page |9

Designing biological wastewater treatment systems involves a hierarchy of
methodologies (Aboagye et al., 2021; Gu et al., 2023; Narayanan & Narayan, 2019;
Padrón-Páez et al., 2020; Rivas et al., 2008; Shojaei & Shojaei, 2021), each with unique
strengths and limitations. A general structure of the alternative computational design
methodologies employed in the literature is summarized in Figure 1-1. At the most
fundamental level, direct observations—such as monitoring microbial populations,
nutrient concentrations, sludge quality, and oxygen demand—provide the baseline data
necessary for any subsequent design work (Croll et al., 2023; Manav-Demir et al., 2024).
These observations feed into biophysical models that simulate key biochemical
processes (Henze et al., 2006). Widely recognized models, such as the activated sludge
models (ASM) (Henze et al., 2006), make it possible to predict effluent quality (Calise et
al., 2020; Szeląg et al., 2022), manage energy usage (Szeląg et al., 2022), and achieve
process stability (Caro et al., 2024; Jafarinejad, 2020) in biological wastewater treatment
systems. Initial design efforts often follow a trial-and-error approach, making minor
adjustments like altering retention times, aeration rates, or pH levels, to achieve
acceptable outcomes for the system (Sadri Moghaddam & Pirali, 2021). This approach is
often assisted with simulation software like GPS-X, Biowin, AQUASIM, SUMO, and
SIMBA (Bazemo et al., 2021; Bressani-Ribeiro et al., 2021; Caro et al., 2024; Jafarinejad,
2020; Sadri Moghaddam & Pirali, 2021).
However, as system complexity grows and optimization demands increase, exact
algorithms can be employed to mathematically search for globally optimal configurations
(Aboagye et al., 2021; Damalerio, Beltran, & Aviso, 2022; Padrón-Páez et al., 2020). In
practice, computational challenges and non-linearities in biological reactions limit the
feasibility of exact optimization algorithms, leading to the adoption of heuristic
optimization algorithms—like genetic algorithms, simulated annealing, or generalized
reduce gradient—that generate workable, locally optimal solutions (Gu et al., 2023; Jana
et al., 2022; B. Li et al., 2022; Niu et al., 2022; Rivas et al., 2008; Shojaei & Shojaei,
2021). To bridge the gap between computational complexity and accuracy, linear
approximations of non-linear models can be combined with exact algorithms, delivering
near-globally optimal designs that approach ideal performance without excessive
calculation times (Kim et al., 2009; Kusiak & Wei, 2012; M. Li et al., 2020; T. Yang et al.,
2014). Ultimately, depending on design requirements and resource constraints, the
selection of design methodology can yield outcomes ranging from basic “good-enough”
solutions to near-globally optimal ones, creating a spectrum of approaches that
wastewater engineers can strategically apply for the optimization of new or existing
treatment infrastructure.

P a g e | 10

                    Trial and Error                                                                                           Exact Algorithms

                               Solutions are not optimal,                                           Solutions are not guaranteed.
                                 but are good enough.
                                                                                                      Optimization model is directly
                                      Solutions are greatly                                             based on physical model.
                                      dependent on human                 Applicability is
                                           judgment.                     contingent on              Execution is automatic.
                                                                          many factors.
                                                                                                         Computational cost scales
                                Execution is labor-                                                       exponentially with the
                                    intensive.                                                           complexity of the physical
                                                                                                                  model.



                                                                                                    Solutions are independent
                                                                   Reliability of the solution is      of human judgment.
                                     Computationally                dependent on either the
                                 inexpensive (in general)           accuracy of the physical              Computational cost is
                                                                    model or the reliability of        greatly dependent on solver
                                                                     the calibration dataset.          type and parameter values.




                              Solutions are always
                                  guaranteed.                                                        Solutions are not
                               Computationally inexpensive                                           globally-optimal.
                              regardless of solver type or the
                                                                      Computational cost
                             complexity of the physical model.                                                   Solutions are not
                                                                      scales linearly with
                                       Solutions are near              the complexity of                        always guaranteed.
                                       globally-optimal.              the physical model.
                                  Reliability of the solution is                                       Solutions are not
                                  dependent on the accuracy                                            globally-optimal.
   Linear Approximation of
                                    of the approximation.
       Physical Models
              +
      Exact Algorithms                                                                                                     Heuristic Algorithms


Figure 1-2 Similarities and differences between the computational design methodologies
A comparison of the alternative computational design approaches described above are
presented in Figure 1-2. Trial-and-error methods excel at providing quick fixes and
allowing operators to make incremental improvements based on empirical observations.
It is the most commonly applied approach in practice with the use of various simulation
software (Bazemo et al., 2021; Caro et al., 2024; Díez-Montero et al., 2019; Hellal & Abou-
Elela, 2021; Jafarinejad, 2020; Jasim, 2020; Kasi et al., 2011; Lainé et al., 1999; Liang et
al., 2021; Nazif et al., 2023; Sadri Moghaddam & Pirali, 2021; Simsek et al., 2012). Such
methods are manageable, but they often require substantial human effort and are labor-
intensive. On the opposite end, exact algorithms seek globally optimal configurations and
ensure that no superior solution remains undiscovered in an optimization routine that
seeks either optimal process design or control. Though computationally demanding,
these algorithms provide high precision and are best suited for well-defined and smaller-
scale problems, where linearity assumptions can be considered acceptable (Aboagye et
al., 2021; Damalerio, Beltran, & Aviso, 2022; Padrón-Páez et al., 2020). However, this
rarely happens when dealing directly with complex biochemical models of wastewater
treatment processes, which are often nonlinear due to Monod functions that define
reaction rates (Henze et al., 2006). Positioned between these extremes, heuristic
algorithms offer a pragmatic compromise by applying educated “rules of thumb” to

P a g e | 11

navigate large, complex, and highly non-linear scenarios (Poh et al., 2016). While they
may not guarantee a global optimum, they efficiently generate good solutions within
reasonable timeframes, making them popular for intricate systems where exact
approaches may be infeasible (Poh et al., 2016).
On the other hand, linear approximations present a way to simplify complex, non-linear
biological processes into more manageable models (Kim et al., 2009; Kusiak & Wei, 2012;
M. Li et al., 2020; T. Yang et al., 2014). These linear model approximations may directly
be calibrated using data that would otherwise be used to calibrate the nonlinear
biophysical models that are usually used in simulation software like Biowin, GPS-X,
AQUASIM, SUMO, and SIMBA (Bressani-Ribeiro et al., 2021; Hellal & Abou-Elela, 2021;
Kasi et al., 2011; Lainé et al., 1999; Liang et al., 2021). Unlike nonlinear biophysical
models, these methods can be integrated with exact optimization algorithms to achieve
near-globally optimal solutions without imposing excessive computational demands. This
balanced approach effectively combines accuracy with practicality. However, a notable
challenge is that linearization techniques commonly employed in the literature, such as
Taylor series expansions (M. Li et al., 2020; T. Yang et al., 2014), significantly restrict the
applicability of the models to the vicinity of the approximation point. Furthermore, while
such approaches are frequently utilized in process controller design (M. Li et al., 2020; T.
Yang et al., 2014), their application to optimal process design—such as wastewater
network optimization and process set-point determination—remains relatively rare.
Another linearization technique is through multivariable polynomial fitting (Ahn et al.,
2014; Kim et al., 2009; Lim et al., 2011). However, the current application of this approach
usually disregards the interdependence of compounds in biological wastewater treatment
systems, which is a major flaw. Kusiak & Wei (2012) was the first to address this issue
with a system of coupled nonlinear equations for the activated sludge process, but their
training dataset included target variables which constitute a major data spillage. Their
model is also nonlinear. At present, a competent linear model addressing the issues
presented above is not yet developed.
On the other hand, common machine learning (ML) methods, such as XGBoost,
LightGBM, random forests, support vector machines (SVM), and artificial neural networks
(ANNs), while widely used in soft sensing and optimal control (Croll et al., 2023; Fang et
al., 2011; Manav-Demir et al., 2024), are rarely utilized for approximating biophysical
models of biological wastewater treatment systems like, for example, bio-towers (Tyagi
et al., 2021). These ML methods yield nonlinear approximations, but they can still be
solved with greater ease than the original biophysical models using heuristic optimization
algorithms (Fang et al., 2011). For example, Fang et al. (2011) trained an SVM using
simulation data then performed optimization using the trained SVM model. A similar data-
driven application was performed by Asadi et al. (2017) but with random forests, artificial
neural networks, multi-adaptive regression spline, and k-nearest neighbors algorithms.
ML methods are suitable candidates for the approximation because they can

P a g e | 12

simultaneously perform predictions on multiple wastewater compounds. Multiple
response optimization has been emphasized as an important research direction in the
field of biological wastewater treatment (Nazlabadi et al., 2021).
On the other hand, ML method that generate linear models that can perform simultaneous
predictions on multiple wastewater compounds is presently unexplored in the literature
(Nazlabadi et al., 2021). An obvious candidate for such a method would be some new
implementation of the canonical regression technique, but no attempt is currently made
for applications such as approximating nonlinear biophysical models of biological
wastewater treatment systems. This research direction is interesting because it can
greatly improve on existing linear approximations like Taylor series expansion (M. Li et
al., 2020; T. Yang et al., 2014) and multivariable polynomial fitting (Ahn et al., 2014; Kim
et al., 2009; Lim et al., 2011); and would facilitate near-global optimization for either
process design or control unlike the previously mentioned ML models which are only
solvable using heuristic optimization algorithms that yield locally optimal solutions.
The special case of bio-towers as a potential application for these ML methodologies is
also interesting because the transport and biochemical reaction mechanisms of bio-
towers are governed by advection-diffusion-reaction (ADR) equations. A protocol for
approximating either the steady-state or unsteady state ADR equations of bio-towers by
ML methods is also an unexplored realm in the literature. ADR equations are notoriously
difficult to calculate within an optimization routine, so a protocol for its linear
approximation can greatly advance the efficiency of computational routines in simulation
and design software like Biowin, GPS-X, AQUASIM, SUMO, and SIMBA. In fact, none of
this software currently have built-in process design optimization features, which could be
attributed to the computational difficulty of calculating with the nonlinear biophysical
models of biological wastewater systems for which they are based on. Given these gaps,
the objectives of this study are:
      Investigate and compare existing ML algorithms for approximating nonlinear
       biophysical models of biological wastewater treatment systems.
      Develop a new method for generating a linear model that surpasses the ML
       algorithms mentioned above in terms of (i) computing time, (ii) prediction accuracy,
       and (iii) robustness when modeling both the activated sludge system (perfectly
       mixed, suspended growth system) and bio-tower system (advective-diffusive,
       attached growth system).
      Demonstrate the use of ML algorithms for optimal process design.

P a g e | 13

2    Theoretical Background

Central to biological wastewater treatment is the fact that continuous supply of matter and
energy is essential to support life through the creation and upkeep of cells. The key
elements involved in this life system include hydrogen (H), oxygen (O), carbon (C) and
nitrogen (N). Based on this, microorganisms involved in biological wastewater treatment
can be categorized based on the three main energy sources they derive from.
Photosynthetic autotrophs rely on radiation as their primary energy source. Heterotrophs
obtain energy from organic compounds. Chemical autotrophs use inorganic compounds
as their energy source.

    Bulk wastewater                                                                                                                              Predation
                                                                                                                                                  Decay
                                     Photosynthesized carbohydrates




                                                                                                                                        Electron acceptors,
                             Light                                                                          Organics
                                                                                                                                         i.e.,  and N
                                                                      Predation, Decay




                                                                                                             Egestion, Decay



            Photosynthesis
                                                                                                                               Growth




        Photosynthetic
                                                                                                            Heterotrophs                                      Chemical autotrophs
         autotrophs
                                                                                    Decay, Ammonification




                                                                                                                                            Nutrients,
        i.e., Cyanobacteria                                                                                        i.e., Rotifers           i.e., N           i.e., Nitrosomonas species
                                                          Decay
                                                     Growth


Figure 2-1 Simplistic representation of the processes carried out by microorganisms in
biological WWTPs following ASM3. The arrows indicate material conversion. The labels
on the arrows indicate the conversion process.
A simplistic representation of the (bio)processes that microorganisms carry out in
biological WWTPs is illustrated in Figure 2-1. Solar radiation is the primary energy source
for the biosphere, and photosynthetic autotrophs capture this energy through
photosynthesis, converting CO₂ and water into glucose and releasing O₂, which supports
other life forms. These autotrophs also require nutrients like nitrogen and phosphorus for
growth and metabolism, with nitrogen being essential for proteins and nucleic acids, and
phosphorous for ATP production. However, nutrient availability, especially in aquatic
ecosystems, can limit their growth. Heterotrophs, such as protozoa, fungi, and bacteria,
rely on consuming other organisms or organic matter for energy, which is used to
synthesize their cells, though some energy is lost as heat in the process. This results in
a decrease in available organic energy as it transfers between organisms, eventually
limiting heterotrophic life. Chemical autotrophs, which derive energy from the oxidation of
